Jsgro episode 2 draft (#23)
carpentries-incubator/better-research-software-r: episodes/02-better-start-version-control.md

The directory `.Rproj.user/` was created by RStudio when the project was created in the previous section. Its presence is revealed by the `-a` option to show hidden files. 
In some cases some other files may appear depending on your OS or other factors: 
afile named `.DS_Store` might be seen by Mac users and can be ignore for the moment and a file named `.Rhistory` might appear. It is very possible that you do not see these files at the time.

Over the rest of the course, we will transform a collection of these files into a well-structured software project that follows established good practices in research software engineering.

The first thing you may notice that our software project contains folder `astronaut-data-analysis-old` which presumably tries to keep track of older versions of the code. There is a better way to do that using version control tool, such as Git, and we can delete this folder so it does not cause confusion:

```bash
rm -r astronaut-data-analysis-old
```
As a reminder, be careful with this *recursive remove* command as there is no undo possibility.

## Version control

> Before we do any further changes to our software, we want to make sure we can keep a history of what changes we have done since we inherited the code from our colleague.

Reviewer: I'm trying to fix it with suggestions but this is a bit tough in this episode because some of the lines contain parts of multiple sentences.

> Before we do any further changes to our software, we want to make sure we can keep a history of what changes we have done since we inherited the code from our colleague.

Reviewer 2: I agree one sentence (or one thought) per line is better.

However I'm concerned:
1) When doing it at the same time as other changes, it makes the other changes hard to see.
2) It will make it harder to rebase with the python lesson.

> Before we do any further changes to our software, we want to make sure we can keep a history of what changes we have done since we inherited the code from our colleague.

Reviewer: Good points!  I'll cease but would prefer not to go back and switch them back at this point.

**Git** is the most popular version control system used by researchers worldwide, and the one we'll be using.
Git is used mostly for managing code when developing software, but it can track *any* files --
and is particularly effective with text-based files (e.g. source code like `.py`, `.c`, `.r`, but also `.csv`, `.tex` and more).

Git helps multiple people work on the same project (even the same file) at the same time.
Initially, we will use Git to start tracking changes to files on our local machines; later on we will start sharing our

> work on [GitHub](https://github.com) allowing other people to see and contribute to our work.

Reviewer 2: Ok. Fair enough.

### Start tracking changes with Git

::: instructor

CHANGE TBD

Open up VS Code, and launch a **Git Bash** terminal.
Call out how your prompt looks,
and make sure that Windows users are not accidentally using PowerShell.
[Refer back to the setup section on configuring VS Code if anyone needs help.](https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/better-research-software/instructor/installation-instructions.html#visual-studio-code)

:::

Before we start, if you forgot to do it during setup,
tell Git to use `main` as the default branch.
More modern versions of Git use `main`, but older ones still use `master` as their main branch.
They work the same, but we want to keep things consistent for clarity.

```bash
$ git config --global init.defaultBranch main
```

At this point, we should be located in our `spacewalks` directory. 
We want to tell Git to make `spacewalks` a repository -- a directory where Git can track changes to our files. We initialize this new repository with:

```bash
$ git init
```

> This repository just created is "hidden" as it starts with a dot. We can find its name with the same list command used previously:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This repository just created is "hidden" as it starts with a dot. 
We can find its name with the same list command used previously:
```

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
	.Rproj.user/
	data.json
	my code v2.R
	spacewalks.Rproj

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

This tells us that Git has noticed two files in our directory, but unlike Dropbox or OneDrive, it does not *automatically* track them. We need to tell Git explicitly which files we want it to track.
This is not a handicap, but rather helpful, since scientific code can have vast inputs or outputs we might not want Git to track and store (GBs to TBs of space telescope data) or require sensitive information we cannot share (for example, medical records).

Before we commit this initial version, we should try to run it. This is often the first thing you might do upon receiving someone's code.

There are multiple ways to run R code:

Option 1: within RStudio 

- Click once on the file `my code v2.R` within the Files Tab. This will open the file in the top left quadrant.
- Then click on the **"Source"** icon located at the top right of the opened file

Option 2: from the Shell window

> - An R script can be run within the shell with command **`RSCRIPT`** which is part of any R installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An R script can be run within the terminal tab with command **`RSCRIPT`** which is part of any R installation.
```
